__AI Enhances Risk Stratification for Breast Cancer Recurrence and Mortality in Women Exposed to Pesticides: A Call for Reassessment of Stratification Criteria__

__Abstract:__
Accuracy in medical routine plays a crucial role in patient clinical outcomes and quality of life. To achieve these improvements in accuracy and assertiveness in diagnosis and treatment, several areas of healthcare have explored the use of machine learning (ML), including breast cancer researchers. These professionals have followed the trend of exploring these tools for a better understanding of patterns in patient history data, which can help predict disease outcomes, also allowing for more accurate diagnoses and more effective treatments. Brazil is the largest consumer of pesticides in the world and, although this occupational exposure has consequences for human health, this is not a risk factor considered in the Diagnostic and Therapeutic Guidelines for Breast Carcinoma, currently available in Joint Ordinance No. 5, of April 18, 2019, to guide the choice of diagnosis, treatment and monitoring of individuals affected by breast cancer. Considering this, the present study employed ML algorithms to predict the risk stratification for recurrence and mortality in breast cancer patients and to re-stratify them by incorporating pesticide exposure as an additional risk factor. To achieve this, using clinicopathological data of 451 women we trained logistic regression, random forest, support vector machines, and gradient boosting algorithms to determine which model exhibited superior predictive performance. Subsequently, these models were applied to patient stratification, with pesticide exposure included as an additional parameter. The performance of the models in this study was measured by the precision, accuracy, recall, f1-score, and area under the ROC curve (AUC-ROC). Using data with greater severity in the stratification of patients occupationally exposed to pesticides, a 24.12% gain in the prediction quality of the random forest model was identified, showing us that with this change, ML models can better learn and understand patterns in the data set. This makes it clear that there is a need to include exposure to pesticides as a parameter in risk stratification, especially in regions of family farming.

__Keywords:__ machine learning; breast cancer; risk stratification; pesticides
